the following content is provided under
a Creative Commons license your support
will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to
offer high quality educational resources
for free
to make a donation or to view additional
materials from hundreds of MIT courses
visit MIT opencourseware at ocw.mit.edu
alright let's just take 10 more seconds
okay
so let's let's look at this one so first
you want to notice that you have a plus
one here so you've lost an electron and
then you want to think about what
happens when you start filling the D
orbitals so when you start filling the D
orbitals then the energy changes and 4s
and 3d switch and energy and so we could
write this one either way we could have
put the 3d first and the 4s second but
importantly now because of that switch
and energy the electron that is lost is
lost from the 4s over here so this has
to do with the fact that electron
configuration of neutral atoms and ions
are different and especially with this
4s 3d switch that the 3d orbitals drop
change energy when you start to fill
them and there's really very similar
energy between 4s and 3d and that leads
to some of the exceptions that you're
responsible to know that there can be
subtle things that switch the energy a
little bit so because they're so close
in energy you have this half filled and
full filled thing where you can pull an
electron from 4s and put it in 3d to
make 3d five or to make 3d ten so
they're very close very close in energy
and that leads to some of these
interesting features okay so today's
lecture we're moving on to the periodic
table but we're actually talking about a
lot of the things that we just talked
about so today actually turns out to be
an awesome review for some of the
material that's on the exam so that
worked out really well in past years
this material was on exam 1 exam 1 was
later and so if you see if you get old
exams from other people not the ones
that are posted the ones that are posted
are mostly old exams except we replaced
questions for material not covered on
this exam with material that is covered
so it's not a hundred percent an old
exam from this class because we've never
had an exam this early before so there
were no good examples so if you get old
exams from other people do not freak out
when you look at it like oh my goodness
somehow I haven't managed to learn this
there are this today's lecture and also
Friday's lecture we're typically on exam
one so just keep that in mind so you use
our practice exams and then you will not
have that problem all right so moving on
to the periodic table and very exciting
for me and so today we're going to talk
about trends in the periodic table we're
gonna finish that up on Friday after the
exam which will be a clicker competition
and then we're going to go on and talk
about bonding of the elements in the
periodic table so that's where where
we're headed
so the periodic table here is one of
them that's up here so this was
originally put together a while ago and
it turned out to be amazingly accurate
and this really describes all of the
elements so this is kind of like the the
artist the artist paint box for a
chemist or a wordsmith swards these are
all the ingredients that go into making
everything some of these elements are
incredibly dangerous and they're used to
make explosives they're used to make
bombs other elements here are found in
the human body and allow us to live all
materials whether it's a desk a pointer
a bottle of water everything is made up
of elements so this is really this is
why I think one of the reasons why
chemistry is so cool because we think
about the elements and elements are made
of everything so we think about
everything that makes up everything and
that that's pretty neat so just to kind
of give you a flavor of the joy of the
periodic table and introduce you to the
elements that make up this periodic
table I feel like we should think about
this in music
I is a metal you see it every day
oxygen eventually will make it rust away
carbon in its ordinary form is cold
crush
beyond the gas that lights up the sign
for a visa place the coins that you pay
with their copper nickel and zinc silica
and oxygen make concrete bricks and
glass
you
okay so you get the you get the sense of
this the song is quite accurate it has
lots of information to why them and it
points out some other things like
elephants are made of elements and we
are made of elephants oh no wait
elements no it's it's a really fun fun
song and it it really I think expresses
why it's so important to learn about the
properties of the elements and all the
things that you can do with them so when
it was originally put together it was
put together based on sorting elements
by their properties such as ones over
here in column one are soft and reactive
metals and it was observed that the
elements over here are pretty inert so
they were all grouped together and later
we have pretty much kept this grouping
but now it's really grouped by the
electron configurations which is one of
the things you need to know for the exam
how to write these electron
configurations and these reactive metals
it turns out they only have one valence
electron so they like to react because
they want to have a noble gas a
configuration so they're very reactive
whereas these others that were not
reactive have filled electron
configurations so they don't want any
extra electrons and they don't want to
lose them they don't want to get any
they're very happy as they are so
they're inert so now these groupings
make a lot of sense in terms of the
electron configurations now it doesn't
tell you everything so if you know one
element is very safe to consume that
doesn't necessarily mean something right
next to it is just as good and if we
consider over here we consider lithium
sodium and potassium sodium and
potassium are ions that are really
important in the human body and you have
to make sure that if you're exercising a
lot that you keep up the amounts that
you're getting so they're very important
ions and they will often hang around and
serve as counter ions to other molecules
in your body and you have sit trade in
your body so you could have sodium
citrate with
sodium's hanging out or potassium
citrate but that doesn't necessarily
mean that other things will work as well
like lithium for example but a while ago
when 7up was soda was first kind of put
on the market they thought well sodium
and potassium are a little boring let's
sort of make things a little more
exciting and used lithium citrate
instead it's right there in the same
column of the of the periodic table and
citrate makes things taste lemony which
is a lovely taste and we'll have lithium
as the counter ion to that and so they
said this is this dispels hangovers it
takes the ouch out of grouch and does
anyone know what lithium is used for
today so it's often used for people who
have bipolar disorders or
manic-depressive so it really did take
the ouch out of grouch but it's not not
something that you should just put in a
consumable soda so it has somewhat
different properties even though it's
part of that same group so this is a
lesson that I feel like we keep learning
over and over again with other things
that you have to be a little more more
careful just because it's hanging out
near its friends doesn't mean it's gonna
be exactly the same all right so the
periodic table is amazing thing let's
think about the trends in the periodic
table so we're gonna first do ionization
energy and we've already talked about
ionization energy so this is awesome
because it turns out to be a really good
review for the exam so ionization energy
again is the minimum energy it's going
to take to remove an electron from an
atom and if we just talk about just say
ie for ionization energy we're gonna you
should assume it's the first ionization
energy unless it is specified and we saw
before that ionization energy is
opposite in sign to the binding energy
and so here we have the binding energy
of an electron and we know that this is
an
multi-electron atom because it depends
on N and L if it was just hydrogen or
one other one electron atom than
anything with n all those orbitals are
degenerate but if you have putting in
multi electrons then it matters whether
you're talking about not just n but L
matters to whether it's an S orbital or
a p orbital so we've seen this before
but now let's talk more about different
ionization energies so let's go look at
boron and think about the first
ionization energy and this is the energy
to move an electron from the highest
occupied atomic orbital that's what that
stands for and it's written out in your
notes and so what is the highest
occupied orbital in this case just yell
it out 2p so let's look at removing an
electron from 2p if we do that we go to
boron plus and we have 1s2 2s2 and an
electron and this process the energy
involved in this process is the
ionization energy the first ionization
energy it's also equal to the binding
energy of the 2p electron and again the
signs are opposite here so now second
ionization energy we just keep going the
next highest occupied atomic orbital is
2s so if we remove we get boron plus 2
1s2 2s1
and an electron and now the energy
difference is due to these second
ionization energy so we say ie 2 and
that is equal to the binding energy of
the 2's electron in B plus because
that's what we're removing we're
removing the 2 a 2's electron from B
plus here so we can keep going we can go
to the third ionization energy and now
we're also going to be removing an
electron from 2s and when we remove the
electron it only had 1
so now we have a Barham plus 3 1 s 2 and
an electron the energy difference is the
third ionization energy ie sub 3 and
this is equal to the binding energy or
the difference in sign of the binding
energy of 2 s in the plus 2 system so
now if we look at this little table over
here that's in your handout or this
little chart in your handout you can see
that there is quite a bit of difference
between these different ionization
energies so we were talking about boron
so here we have the first first
ionization energy second ionization
energy third ionization energy and
fourth ionization energy and so there's
can be quite a bit difference in the
magnitude of these ionization energies
or how hard it is to pull off successive
electrons and so here are some of the
other ones you see when you're going
here with boron you remove the first one
here the second one is about 3 times
harder we're jumping from P to s not
much difference within s to s but once
we get to helium here 1 s 2 that's
really hard to pull off another electron
here so this fourth one is really big
and then we can look at these other
other trends beryllium here we have the
2s and then we go to a1 s and then we
have here we have just the one electron
over here for lithium and then when we
come up here it's a lot harder so we can
look at these tables and realize these
are not going to be these are not going
to be necessarily the same there can be
big jumps in ionization energy and I'm
going to come back to all of this in
sodium and potassium in a little bit but
first let's just stick with boron for a
minute and think more about the
different kinds of ionization there so
now let's just consider taking a 2 s
electron but from two different types of
boron boron plus and regular boron so in
this first case
we're going to take one of these 2's
electrons and now we have a difference
in energy this is the second ionization
energy the first one removed the
electron from P so we saw this before
removing one of the electrons from 2's
and so this is the second ionization
energy it's also equal to the binding
energy of the 2's electron in boron plus
now we're going to take a 2's electron
but we're going to do it from boron so
the P electron is still there so we go
from 2 s 2 2 to s 1 over here and this
energy difference is an ionization
energy for a 2's electron and that's
equal to the binding energy of the 2's
electron in boron so do you think these
energies are going to be the same or
different
are they equal no so I showed you that
little chart and that made you probably
think that there's going to be some
differences no they're not equal so why
are they not equal well when you have
boron plus you have lost an electron so
you have less electrons available to
shield so you have less shielding in
boron plus than in boron and if there's
less shielding you're gonna have a
higher Z effective less shielding
they'll feel more the force of the
positive charge of the nucleus and
therefore it's gonna take more energy to
pull it off so it's going to be more
tightly bound it's going to be held in
because this less shielding higher Z
effective alright so now let's try a
clicker question
ten more seconds
okay so most of you did not like answer
one but does someone want to explain
this and can give them a pen do you want
to just walk up someone want to give an
answer why okay over there okay so um if
we're choosing between two and three
four in answer for number two the 3p
orbital has two electrons in it and so
electrons by nature kind of repulse each
other right so it's a little easier to
pop one of those two out then if there
was only one electron in there by itself
and you're trying to pull it out so yeah
you'd pick two over three okay yeah so
so actually I don't know if we can take
the the answer it's a little hard to
read it with the colors on top of it but
here you have this plus system here so
you've removed this extra electron so
there should be you feel a higher Z
effective here which will mean that it's
harder to sort of pull to pull things
off and let's see this one you look it
there's no way to take the answer down
right so this one oh yeah okay there
that's better I can see this more so
this this one here you're pulling one
from the the s orbitals here the p
orbital is easier to pull it off it
takes less energy from P than from s
okay so let's continue we'll come back
to some of these ideas as we go along
because now we're going to think about
how these trends go across the periodic
table so across a row ionization energy
is going to increase and the reason for
this is that Z is increasing so we're
having more and more protons a bigger Z
effective
you're also adding electrons though but
n the shell remains the same so if Z is
increasing and is remaining the same
what do you predict about Z effective is
it going to increase decrease or stay
the same it's going to increase so Z
effective will also increase and if you
had a case that every single time you
had total shielding of that added
electron then it might stay the same but
you're not going to have this case this
extreme case of total shielding so if Z
increase the infective is also going to
increase as you go across and because n
is staying the same you have more or
less kind of the same amount of distance
from the nucleus so you just have this
stronger Z effective and it's holding on
to the electrons now if you go down a
column the ionization energy decreases
so in this case you're also increasing Z
but now you're increasing n as well and
so when you increase n you have your 3s
and and you go to your fours and your
fives and so now those other orbitals
are way far away and you have a much
bigger effective radius here the Z is
getting bigger but it's not really
reaching as strongly out so here the
effect of increasing n is making a much
bigger difference than increasing Z so
going across we have this increase in
ionization energy because Z effective is
increasing while n is staying the same
or Z is increasing while n is staying
the same which means the effective is
increasing and going down it's really n
that dominates that pattern so you have
a decrease because you're going to
higher and higher n so let's look at
some of those and
we can go back and and look at what I
showed you before I studied get back to
sodium and potassium here so if we
consider all these if we remove one
electron then we're gonna go to a noble
gas configuration so with our with our
first with our first ionization when
we're over here we're going to go and
and so when we do that then we say why
are these numbers different for the
second ionization we have a noble gas
configuration after we've lost one
electron in each case but then we can
say ok well helium is up here than neon
then then argon so Z or the ionization
energy is decreasing as we go down here
because n is increasing so we see that
trend in our in our plot over here
there's a couple other things that we
can see in this plot so we also see that
for boron this fourth ionization energy
is is really big and it's bigger than
beryllium is third which is bigger than
lithium second so let's think about why
that's the case and that is another
clicker question
okay let's just do 10 more seconds
oops alright I was actually expecting a
lower for this that's awesome right so
it turns out one is true but all of
these other ones are also going to be
the same because they've just lost more
electrons so all of them have the same
configuration so that doesn't explain
what's going on here and this is also
true but binding energies are always
negative that does not explain anything
so the thing that explains the trend is
this one even though they're all now
have the same configuration it's gonna
be a lot harder to pull off the electron
from the one that has the biggest Z
effective because that's going to be
bound more tightly great so you're
getting you're getting the hang of these
these types of questions alright so
those are some of the trends and of
course when there trends there's always
glitches these aren't really exceptions
there are more glitches and we can
rationalize them pretty easily so again
the trend increasing ionization energy
across decreasing ionization energy down
the increase across is the Z effective
increase and down is the increase in n
but when you actually look at is a ssin
energies which are often reported in
kilojoules per mole versus Z you see
that it's not just kind of a straight
straight line here and if we put the
elements on here that these correspond
to we see 1s1 1s2 a drop to 2s and then
we're doing another 2's a drop to 2p and
then so on as you go up along so let's
look at some of these little glitches
why isn't this a straighter line here so
I'm now going to blow up this region on
this slide here and I can just put up
this this diagram again and you can see
that it's
through so we're talking about the first
ionization energies here you see lithium
is lower then it goes higher then it
goes down again so that's that little
trend over here so why is this a case so
the ionization energy for beryllium is a
bit higher than the ionization energy
for boron and so it turns out that this
glitch then is we're going from the 2s
to the 2p and 2p it's easier to pull off
that electron so that that's why you
have this lower ionization energy we
have another glitch over here now we're
just within P so what's going on there
and it's very small it's a very small
little difference but here the
ionization energy for nitrogen is bigger
than for oxygen so it's easier to pull
off an electron from oxygen and if you
draw out your diagram here if nitrogen
where we have obeyed hons rules and we
put everything in parallel but for
oxygen we have one extra so we have to
pair the electron so it turns out it's a
little easier to steal this 2p electron
because it's the first one paired and I
kind of think about that is again the
sort of the bus where everyone sits
there's you can sit two people per seat
one person sits down no one else wants
to sit next to them until all the seats
are taken and sometimes when you're
sitting in the seat you're really really
happy when that person gets up who's
sitting next to you
maybe there's another seat available
they move over to another seat so it's
often easier to reject the second person
from the seat there's a little bit of
repulsion going on there everyone's
working they're moving their arms as
they're doing their chemistry homework
at least the buses I'm on anyway so we
we can that's that's why there's a
glitch there all right so this is all
well and good we have our trends but I
always like to think about how do we
know any of this is really true how do
you
we measure these ionization energies and
so we're just going to talk about one
method for measuring these for a minute
so photoelectron spectroscopy p/es is
used to determine ionization values and
so you can have some some energy that
you will use to excite something like
neon which is gas which lights up a sign
for a pizza place and you can eject an
electron from it that has a certain
amount of kinetic energy and what you
actually measure in this technique is
the velocity of the electron but from
velocity as you know you can get kinetic
energy and from kinetic energy we can
get ionization energy so let's look at
this experiment and think about the
electrons being ejected so we have again
our neon configuration and we'll lose
one electron from P here and it will
have a velocity and a kinetic energy we
can also think about losing an electron
from s and we're just going to lose one
electron per shell here and we can lose
an electron from the 2s and the 1s and
all of those should have distinct
velocities and distinct kinetic energies
so if we know that if we measure
velocity calculate kinetic energy then
we can find the ionization energy if we
knew the energy that we use to excite
the neon so the incident energy equals
the ionization energy plus kinetic
energy or rewritten ionization energy
equals the incident energy or initial
energy minus the kinetic energy so we
can use this to calculate ionization
energies and this should look awfully
familiar to you it's very similar to
something that will be on exam one where
we're talking about using photons and
extruding them at metal surfaces and
injecting electrons that have kinetic
energy if they
the energy used to hit the metal is
greater in energy than the work function
and the extra comes off in kinetic
energy this is basically all the same
idea here alright so in this particular
case you would measure three different
velocities or three different kinetic
energies and now we can think about what
those should probably correspond to
using our chemistry knowledge and some
calculations here so we have these three
different kinetic energies we know the
energy of the incident so we can do some
math and when we subtract those we get
one ionization energy of 22 and then
this kinetic energy is less so we're
going to get a higher kinetic or
ionization energy of 48 and this is
really small and so now we get an
ionization energy of 870 and so we might
not necessarily know which orbitals
these correspond to but if we think
about it it should have a lowest
ionization energy to take an electron
out of 2p next would be 2s and then the
hardest electron to eject would be from
the 1s and this is these are very pretty
similar to each other but this is a much
bigger number over here and so that's
kind of consistent with with what we
know alright so this is how you measure
it and again this is a multi electron
system and so then the energy is going
to depend on the two quantum numbers it
depends on L and n it matters what
specific orbital you're talking about so
let's just think about another problem
here suppose you had five dis really
distinct kinetic energies assume that a
very distinct kinetic energy means a
different sub shell and so then we want
to think about what
the possible elements in the periodic
table that could produce a spectrum with
these five very very distinct kinetic
energies and so the way you think about
this is you want to find what elements
are gonna have five different kinds of
orbitals and so we can list the first
set here 1s 2s 2p 3s 3p that's 5 and
then you need to know from the periodic
table where are the elements where
you're filling the 3p and
those are over here so again we talked
and this this part will be these
problems aren't on the exam but on the
exam you need to know that this is 1:1
as you're filling 1s you're filling 2s
you're filling 2p you're filling 3s
you're filling 3p that you need to
interpret you'll be given a periodic
table but you need to be able to know
what orbitals are being filled in the
different parts of the periodic table so
let's just try a practice with that
hmm
alright let's just take 10 more seconds
all right so we might need to work on
the sort of counting so again you want
to think about you have 1s 2s 2p 3s 3p
4s 3d and and 4p so I think if you if we
get the counting down we'll be good but
again you need to look at the periodic
table and know what's getting filled all
right so let's move on and talk about
electron affinity and maybe we can
squeeze in some electronegativity at the
end these are very related topics and
pretty fast all right
so electron affinity the ability to gain
electrons so what we're talking about
here is how likely atom X is to grab an
electron and become X minus so we often
think about halogens when we're talking
about this like Clark chlorine so we
have CL plus an electron CL minus and
here the change in energy associated
with gaining that electron is minus 349
kilojoules per mole energy is released
and that means that the ion is more
stable than the parent so chloride is
very happy to become CL minus and so you
think about energy being released if you
think about a kid I was my husband's out
of town so I was watching her
six-year-old daughter this weekend and
she was racing around like a crazy
person until she collapsed in a heap so
energy is released and she became a more
stable six-year-old so that's what's
happening with chloride as well more or
less
so here the electron affinity is minus
the change in energy so if we talked
about the electron affinity of chloride
for the elec
Tron to become CL - you would say that
was plus 349 kilojoules per mole so
unlike ionization energy which is always
what positive or negative ionization
energy always positive ion affinity can
be positive or negative and that tells
you something about how much it wants to
gain electrons so nitrogen plus an
electron going to n minus has a positive
energy value here and has a negative
electron affinity so n minus the might
the minus one ion is less stable than
its parent so it is not as happy as
chloride to do this so trends in
ionization usually you have an increase
going across and a decrease going down
and let's just consider noble gases and
what you think about them so we'll do
one final clicker question
it should be pretty fast okay ten
seconds
okay yep there are in fact negative and
so we can think about this over here
noble gases have negative electron
affinities noble gases are very happy
the way they are if you had to add
another electron to them you would need
to make a new sub shell there which they
don't want to do and so halogens on the
other hand which are right next door
have highest electron affinity so if
you're over here they want to gain an
electron and become a noble gas noble
gases want to stay the way they are so
the increased trend ends right before
you get to the noble gases they're in
our own category okay so we're going to
end with that and we'll continue with
electronegativity on Friday